.TH HYDEQUERY 1 "November 2025" "hydequery 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hydequery \- High-performance configuration parser for Hyprland
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hydequery
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I CONFIG_FILE
.B \-Q
.I QUERY
.RI [ \-Q
.IR QUERY .\|.\|.]
.br
.B hydequery
.B \-\-fetch\-schema
.br
.B hydequery
.B \-\-help
|
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hydequery
is a blazing-fast CLI tool written in Rust for querying values from Hyprland
configuration files. It supports nested keys, dynamic variables, type filtering,
regex matching, and multiple export formats.
.PP
The tool parses standard Hyprland configuration format including nested sections,
variable definitions, and source directives.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Required Arguments"
.TP
.I CONFIG_FILE
Path to the Hyprland configuration file.
Supports tilde (~), environment variables, and glob patterns.
.TP
.BI \-Q ", " \-\-query " " \fIQUERY\fR
Query to execute. Can be specified multiple times for multiple queries.
.br
Format: \fBkey[type][regex]\fR
.SS "Schema Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-schema " " \fIPATH\fR
Load schema file for default values.
Use \fBauto\fR to load from cache (~/.cache/hydequery/hyprland.json).
.TP
.B \-\-fetch\-schema
Download and cache the latest schema from repository.
Schema is saved to ~/.cache/hydequery/hyprland.json.
.TP
.B \-\-get\-defaults
Output all configuration keys defined in the schema file.
Requires \fB\-\-schema\fR to be specified.
.SS "Output Options"
.TP
.BI \-\-export " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Output format. Supported values:
.RS
.IP \fBjson\fR
JSON object or array with key, value, and type fields.
.IP \fBenv\fR
Environment variable assignments (KEY="value").
.RE
.TP
.BI \-D ", " \-\-delimiter " " \fISTR\fR
Delimiter for plain text output when multiple queries are specified.
Default: newline (\\n).
.SS "Behavior Options"
.TP
.B \-s ", " \-\-source
Follow source directives recursively.
Parses all included configuration files with cycle detection.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-missing
Don't exit with code 1 when queries return NULL values.
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Exit with error on configuration parse failures.
By default, parse errors are silently ignored.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable debug logging to stderr.
Shows internal operations like key lookups and injected lines.
.SS "Information"
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\-help
Display colorful help message with examples and exit.
.TP
.B \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH QUERY FORMAT
Queries follow the format: \fBkey[type][regex]\fR
.TP
.B key
Simple configuration key lookup.
Nested keys use colon (:) separator, e.g., \fBgeneral:border_size\fR.
.TP
.B $variable
Dynamic variable lookup, e.g., \fB$terminal\fR.
.TP
.B [type]
Optional type filter. Value must match the specified type.
.br
Types: \fBINT\fR, \fBFLOAT\fR, \fBSTRING\fR, \fBVEC2\fR, \fBCOLOR\fR, \fBBOOL\fR
.TP
.B [regex]
Optional regex pattern. Value must match the pattern.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All queries resolved successfully.
.TP
.B 1
One or more queries returned NULL, or an error occurred.
With \fB\-\-allow\-missing\fR, NULL values don't cause exit code 1.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS "Basic Queries"
Query a simple configuration value:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery ~/.config/hypr/hyprland.conf -Q 'general:border_size'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Query a dynamic variable:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q '$terminal'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Multiple queries:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'general:gaps_in' -Q 'general:gaps_out'
.fi
.RE
.SS "Type and Regex Filtering"
Query with type filter:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'general:border_size[INT]'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Query with type and regex filter:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'decoration:rounding[INT][^[0-9]+$]'
.fi
.RE
.SS "Export Formats"
JSON export:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'general:border_size' --export json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Environment variable export:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q '$terminal' --export env
.fi
.RE
.SS "Schema Operations"
Fetch and cache schema:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery --fetch-schema
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use cached schema:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'general:layout' --schema auto
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get all default keys:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf --schema auto --get-defaults
.fi
.RE
.SS "Advanced Usage"
Follow source directives:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'colors:background' -s
.fi
.RE
.PP
Custom delimiter for scripting:
.PP
.RS
.nf
hydequery config.conf -Q 'a' -Q 'b' -D ','
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cache/hydequery/hyprland.json
Cached schema file downloaded by \fB\-\-fetch\-schema\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/hypr/hyprland.conf
Default Hyprland configuration file location.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used for tilde (~) expansion in paths.
.TP
.B XDG_CACHE_HOME
Used to determine cache directory location.
Defaults to ~/.cache if not set.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hyprland (1),
.BR hyprctl (1)
.PP
Hyprland Wiki: https://wiki.hypr.land/
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/HyDE-Project/hyprquery/issues
.SH AUTHORS
Written by RAprogramm <andrey.rozanov.vl@gmail.com>.
.PP
Part of the HyDE (Hyprland Desktop Environment) project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 HyDE Project.
Licensed under GPL-3.0.
